Emily Light
11/3/25


#Check-In: Antibiotic Resistance Database and Query System
### What has went right?
I have gotten a significant amount of work completed this month. I have an interface that I will be building up to increase its functionality and usability. Most of my work recently has been attempting to populate datasets using various search engines such as NCBI and CARD. I created a query engine that can search through my current database. My database takes information from various credible sources so I believe that this software will be very useful to medical professors. I built the structure of the database in PostSql and I was able to write several test queries on the data I have already fed into the database. I have been connecting various entities together such as the antibiotic table to the drug class table. While doing this, I am working on standardizing several core data fields, such as the drug class codes, to make the dataset easier to query.

### What has went wrong?
Some of the data is inconsistent at times so this requires me to search multiple databases for antibiotics one at a time. Most of the time, the missing information is a primary key to one of my database entity. These keys are essential because they connect the bacteria, antibiotic, and resistance genes/mechanicisms to each other. Therefore, if I did not have the information for a primary key, it would not be possible to connect that datapoint to the rest of my database. This is very time-consuming and can be difficult to find the right kinds of information for my dataset. There are also several different names for the same antibiotic which makes searching for information on a specific antibiotic challenging since some databases only identify them by one of its many names. The issue that I had discussed in my proposal was that this type of data was not consistent among various databases and not all databases are complete. 

### Changes to your plan from the proposal?
I do not have much changes to report on during this time. I am gathering data from sources I found after my proposal so I am working with different sources than I initially planned on. The addition of these sources were necessary because the sources I found did not have all the information I needed. I had noticed that even when a source contained the antibiotic or organism I needed, it often was missing one or more fields, so I needed multiple sources to fill one instance of an entity in my database. I think that this change not only appropriately addresses the issue of missing information within the datasets I have been working on, but will also improve the final project as a whole. Having my database contain data from several sources will make its dataset more complete than competing databases and applications. The main goal of this project was to collect mass amounts of information regarding antibiotics and antibiotic resistance and put it in one main source that is easy to sort through. I also want to revise my database because I have noticed that some antibiotics have multiple names, but the existing databases can only pull up their information if you query it using the “main name” the database selected for them. I think queries should recognize most, if not all names of an antibiotic. I might add a “other names” field to the antibiotic entity if time allows.

### What can you change to improve your progress?
I am pretty happy with my progress, but I really want to get a large amount of data I need collected into my software. This task is very challenging and time consuming because I have had to go into many different search engine websites to search through the information I need. I am hoping that the data for the resistance genes and mechanics can be found in a downloadable dataset. Creating inclusive datasets for this project has been difficult and stunted my progress because it is important for this software to contain a large amount of data. Any data related to biology is quite complex so a large amount of it is necessary to ensure that whatever’s using the data is able to get a full understanding of the situation surrounding the data.

### What can we (your peers and shaun) do to help?
I believe that I have the data collection taken care of but any ideas on where to find pre-formated datasets that could be quickly inserted into my database would be helpful. This might be a challenge because I have specific data categories that I need to fill. Even with an already existing dataset, I would still need to edit the data by adding/removing columns so the csv could easily be imported into my database. I also have been struggling with getting in touch with a professional in the medical field or specifically a biological researcher with an interest in antibiotics and antibiotic-resistant bacteria. It would be extremely helpful to have a person who is an expert in this to look over my work so I can get pointers on possible sources I can extract from for data or suggestions on what attributes I can add to my entities.
