## Emily Light
## 10/3/2025
# Antibiotic Resistance Database

## Introduction
For this semester project, I will be investigating the features and aspects of a database holding data regarding antibiotic resistance trends. This topic requires a large amount of data for the medical professionals to understand and have access to. My official research question is: How to build a database of antibiotic resistance bacteria and design its interface to help medical professionals decide the best antibiotics to treat infections?. Having a large database where they have the ability to view information regarding many different antibiotics and statistics could make determining the best treatment options for the patient easier. My goal for the end of the semester is to have a working database that holds a large amount of data regarding bacterial infections and antibiotics that can serve as possible treatments to those infections. I hope to build a software around this database that serves as a query engine and make my software easily accessible for medical professionals who are not as technical as individuals in the computer science field. I have made significant progress so far on my project as I already designed my database using a ER diagram, as well as, implementing it into PostGreSQL. Not only do I hope my final project will store a great amount of data regarding antibiotic resistance, it will have a sophisticated dashboard that includes valuable visualization to display resistance trends. I will build the database with PostGre SQL because it is a very extensive tool for building large data bases with it being an object-relational database system. For the query engine and the dashboard aspect of my project, I have decided to use python because it is a simple language to use and will allow me to quickly get a prototype working. All this will be completed on my personal computers using VS Code.

## Aim
My goal is to develop a large database that holds information related to antibiotic resistance so that it has the ability to follow trends. It will allow medical professionals to easily comprehend those trends. The final project will be a functioning dashboard that will provide medical professionals with a great amount of information in a digestible way. I also plan on developing a query engine for medical personnel to use to help them identify the most appropriate treatment for their patient. 
This software can tremendously assist medical professionals as currently antibiotic resistant bacteria poses a major issue in healthcare. This problem occurs when bacteria come into contact with either one or a few specific antibiotics so many times that it evolves in a way that makes those antibiotics ineffective. This is a major issue in healthcare because when a patient contracts an antibiotic resistant, it can be very difficult for medical professionals to treat and they are left scrambling to find an effective treatment. 
My proposed plan is to collect data from various sources and import it into my database. My database will normalize all the data I have inputted to harmonize it and ensure it all complements each other. The query engine I will later implement will be able to easily identify the antibiotic/bacterial infection the user is searching for and effectively provide them with the information they need for medical research and/or treating a potential patient. Creating a source where a large amount of this information can be found will be a great help in combatting antibiotic resistance. A major way this software can be beneficial is its ability to consolidate data from large antimicrobial resistance (AMR) databases, such as WHO, NCBI, and CARD, into a unified, searchable platform. By doing this, this software will provide a centralized and accessible source of resistance information that medical professionals could use to identify effective antibiotics based on resistance trends in specific organisms or regions. This system will be deemed as successful once the database is fully populated with data originated from several credible sources. We should be able to complete queries regarding both antibiotics and bacterial infections. The software should also produce visuals summarizing the results from the user's queries.

## Intellectual Merit & Broader Impacts
There have been quite a few databases holding this type of data but most are designed for policy-making and public health interventions, while my project is a research-driven system built to organize and explore antibiotic resistance data interactively. One of the major softwares out there is the WHO Global Antimicrobial Resistance and Use Surveillance System. This is a data-sharing framework for global AMR tracking, integrating hospital and laboratory data. It serves as an investment in healthcare digitalization, standardized reporting, and technical support for resource-limited countries. Another source is the CARD 2023 which serves as a Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database and attempts to harmonize with other AMR databases (specifically provided by NCBI). My software provides a unique feature of including data from multiple, highly accreditable sources. This is very impactful due to the challenging nature of normalizing this type of data from the various sources I will be using. If my software is effective, it should make it easier for medical professionals to stay up to date regarding antibiotic resistance. Therefore, making prescripting the most effective antibiotic for a patient easier and producing better recoveries for bacterial infections.

## Solo or Group
I am creating this database system on my own. I have a contact person that can help me make sense of the biological components that are necessary for this project. I created a timeline with weekly objectives for this project to keep me on track. I will have designated "free" days to only focus on this project so I can meet my objective